# Social Physics by Alex Pentland 
*Link*: https://www.amazon.com/Social-Physics-Networks-Make-Smarter/dp/0143126334

“Creativity is just connecting things. When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty, because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something. It seemed obvious to them after a while. That’s because they were able to connect experiences they’ve had and synthesize new things.1”

“The most consistently creative and insightful people are explorers. They spend an enormous amount of time seeking out new people and different ideas, without necessarily trying very hard to find the “best” people or “best” ideas. Instead, they seek out people with different views and different ideas.
Along with this continuous search for new ideas, these explorers do another interesting thing: They winnow down their most recently discovered ideas to the best ones through their habit of bouncing them off of everyone they “meet—and remember that they meet many different sorts of people. Diversity of viewpoint and experience is an important success factor when harvesting innovative ideas. The ideas that provoke reactions of surprise or interest from a wide range of people are the keepers. These are the ideas that are harvested, assembled into a new story about the world, and used to guide actions and decisions.
The most productive people are constantly developing and testing a new story, adding newly discovered ideas to the story and then trying it out on everyone they meet. Like sculpting raw clay into a beautiful statue, over time their story becomes more and more compelling. Finally they decide that it is time to act on it, to bring it into the light and test it against reality. To these people, the practice of harvesting, winnowing, and sculpting with ideas feels like play”

“Some people clearly have impoverished opportunities for social learning because they have too few links to others. Others are embedded in a web of feedback loops, so that they hear only the same ideas over and over again, while most users have a middling number of opportunities for social learning”

“The process of social learning implies that if there is a lot of interaction between someone showing the behavior (the role model) and a new person, and if the new person is susceptible, then it is likely that this new idea will take root and change the new person’s behavior. Susceptibility depends on several factors, including whether the role model is sufficiently similar to the new person that the new behavior is likely to be useful; that the level of trust between the role model and the new person is high; and the consistency between the new idea”

“star producers engage in “preparatory exploration”; that is, they develop dependable two-way streets to experts ahead of time, setting up a relationship that will later help the star producer complete critical tasks. Moreover, the stars’ networks differed from typical work “networks in two important respects. First, they maintained stronger engagement with the people in their networks, so that these people responded more quickly and helpfully. As a result, the stars rarely spent time spinning their wheels or going down blind alleys.
Second, star performers’ networks were also more diverse. Average performers saw the world only from the viewpoint of their job, and kept pushing the same points. Stars, on the other hand, had people in their networks with a more diverse set of work roles, so they could adopt the perspectives of customers, competitors, and managers. Because they could see the situation from a variety of viewpoints, they could develop better solutions to problems.”

“what can be done when the flow of ideas becomes either too sparse and slow or too dense and fast? Within the eToro digital finance world, we have found that we can shape the flows of ideas between people by providing small incentives or nudges to individuals, thus causing isolated traders to engage more with others and those who were too interconnected to engage less and explore outside their current contacts.”

“Social learning is critical: Copying other people’s successes, when combined with individual learning, is dramatically bette”

“Diversity is important: When everyone is going in the same direction, then it is a good bet that there isn’t enough diversity in your information and idea sources,”

“Contrarians are important: When people are behaving independently of their social learning, it is likely that they have independent information and that they believe in that information enough to fight the effects of social influence”

“Synchronization and uniformity of idea flow within a group is critical: When an overwhelming majority seem ready to adopt a new idea, this convinces even the skeptics to go along.”

“The Facebook voting example suggests that information by itself is a rather weak motivator.”


“There is growing evidence that the power of engagement—direct, strong, positive interactions between people—is vital to promoting trustworthy, cooperative behavior.”

“Engagement—repeated cooperative interactions among members of the community—brings movement toward cooperative behavior.
Social network incentives act by generating social pressure around the problem of finding cooperative behaviors, and so people experiment with new behaviors to find ones that are bette”

“Identification with a group of people increases both trust of group members and the social pressure that the group can exert.”


“When the digital social network grows in bursts of engagement, the network ends up being far more effective than if it grows gradually.”

“Engagement requires interaction: If people are to work together efficiently, there needs to be what is called network constraint: repeated interactions between all of the members of the group—not just between a leader and the members, or between the members and the entire group (as at a group meeting).”

Engagement requires cooperation
“Building trust: Trust, by which I mean the expectation of future fair, cooperative exchanges, is built from the history of exchanges between people. Consequently, social networks have both history and momentum.”

Collective intelligence
“equality of conversational turn taking;”
